---
title: "A Georgian Sketchbook #1: Early Days"
date: 2023-07-12T15:00:00-04:00
draft: false
---

My first few days in Georgia: 


It's July 11. It's a misty morning in Tbilisi. The weather is much cooler than it was for the past few days. Tbilisi in the summer can be unbearably hot. There's a light rain and slight fog that gently drapes over mountains that surround the city. 

Tbilisi is amazing. Tbilisi is chaotic. Tbilisi is hard to understand. I understand why I wanted to come here. For Westerners, the city feels mostly like a typical European city. It's changed a lot since the last time I was here in 2020. Now it feels like a mix between Paris, Berlin, Brooklyn, Moscow, and Istanbul. The city feels, at times, very European. You could easily replace the mystical script with French and you'd feel like you've been transported to Toulouse or maybe Lyon. But then you see the mountains surrounding the city, the mishmash of architecture, and you realize that you are somewhere very different.

Georgia is a country of paradoxes. That’s why I love it so much. There are paradoxes baked into every facet of life. Outside my apartment, you see pristine mountains, but in front of them, you see a new ultra-modern housing development. In the streets, you see cafes, Carrefours, and thrift shops, just like you would see in any Western city. But then you see the street vendors selling anything from apples, live ducks, to old shoes and you are reminded of the crushing poverty that permeates through the country.

Tbilisi is not a cheap city. It used to be, but after COVID and the Russian invasion of Ukraine, followed by the subsequent immigration of Russians to Tbilisi, prices here are about the same as in Berlin, except for a few things like taxis, bread, and Khenkali (Georgian dumplings). Prices are reasonable for me because I'm from New York, but when I see a 7 lari (around 3 dollar) coffee at a nice cafe, I wonder, “How are Georgians affording this?”. The quick answer is, they're not. The average monthly wage in Georgia is 1,500 lari, or around 800 dollars. Talking to Georgians, you can feel the pressure that they're under. Life is hard and people are leaving. It doesn’t make sense for young Georgians to stay in Georgia when they can earn much more and pay relatively the same in other European countries, or move to Brooklyn as so many Georgians do.

The Tbilisi to Brooklyn pipeline is so real that it's been brought up over five times in my conversations with Georgians. It costs 10 to 20 thousand US dollars to get from Georgia to Brooklyn, to pay smugglers to get you to Europe, then to Mexico, then across the border, and finally to New York. I'd heard about this when I was in New York, but it didn’t resonate with me. Being here and seeing how hard life is, I understand. Ten thousand dollars isn't a lot of money when it means a chance for a better life, a safer life, a life with opportunity.

Westerners are spoiled; we don’t understand how good we have it. Jamie Diamond, in a speech recently listed out the reasons why America has such an advantage in the world. For every reason he listed: good neighbors, a robust finance sector, lots of innovation, and a functioning democracy, Georgia has the opposite. To succeed Georgia has an uphill battle to maintain their economy and Democracy. 

Americans especially don’t know what it's like to have an enemy at the doorstep. We've all heard about the war in Ukraine, but here you feel it. Tbilisi is teeming with Russians, and in the city center, you often hear Russian more than Georgian. You can spot Russians very easily. They have a certain look: if you see someone blonde, they're almost certainly Russian. If you see a young man with brown hair, then he is most likely Russian. It's in their faces as well. Georgians are darker, with tan skin, and black hair; almost all the men are bald and have beards. Russians are white, very white, most of them have piercing blue eyes.

The Russians here are a problem. They're making the city worse. I thought this wasn't the case before coming here. I thought they might add to the economy and bring much needed capital to the city. but after talking to Georgians, it's clear that Georgians HATE Russians. Russians often segregate themselves in the city, making Russians bars, stores, and schools, cutting out the capital from the Georgian economy. I don’t think Russians would be a problem if they respected Georgians, but they don’t. Russians have always viewed Georgia as a backward Asian country filled with fat, bald men who love to get drunk and to sing. They see Georgia as a province of Russia, a place to go on vacation in Batumi, or to have fun in Tbilisi. Russians are in Tbilisi because Russia is a terrorist state that invaded Ukraine and drafts all young men. Many young men left to avoid the draft. They left for a country that Russia occupies 20% of, and most refuse to acknowledge it. Georgians make it very clear how they feel. There are Ukrainian and NATO flags everywhere, and countless graffiti tags saying “Fuck Russia”, “Go home Russians”. However, many Russians fled here because Russia has eroded all freedoms, and any opinion that goes against the Kremlin can land you in prison. If I were a 23-year-old Russian, I would probably come to Georgia too. And not all Russians view Georgians as backward, some are very anti-Putin, but it's hard to find them in the sea of Russians who are not.

When I told my friends that I was moving to Georgia, many had a view that Georgia is a very mystical place. While Tbilisi is at times a very mystical city with its architecture that blends East, West, Soviet, and ultra-modern often all at once, Georgians don't want to be mystical; they want to be normal. Almost all of the Georgians that I have met want their country to be a normal European country, not a mystical getaway or a place that's unrecognizable to Europeans when they arrive. This can at times be disappointing. When I'm walking through a mall or driving down a street and I think, “this is just like New Jersey, why did I give up my finance job to come to New Jersey?”. But Georgia or Tbilisi isn't about the buildings or even the nature. Georgia is its people; that's what makes the country special. I wrote about the Georgian people in my first post, but I can say that all of what I said is still true. Georgians are still kind and welcoming, especially to Americans. Georgians love America; they also love New York, which is often nice to hear. All the Georgians whom I have spoken to are very happy I'm here, and they're very happy that I'm helping the country by being a teacher. I think about how much I take for granted in New York, and how my education can really make a difference here for the lives of Georgians.

Life is challenging in Georgia, and many people, mostly Georgians, are struggling. However, there's one place that serves as a refuge for young Georgians: the club. I went to Bassiani the night I landed, dressed in all black and without my glasses. However, I was turned away at the door. It appears that Tbilisi is the opposite of Berlin; in Berlin, you dress like a criminal and act German to get into clubs, but in Georgia, you have to dress like a regular person and act like a foreigner to gain entry. Tbilisi is one of the last places in the world where raving is genuinely countercultural. In Berlin and New York, where everything is accepted, being ordinary is the counterculture. Also, Americans and Germans have it relatively easy, living in safe, prosperous countries. However, in Georgia, there is enormous homophobia, and clubs provide a refuge for the LGBT community. Thus, there's a valid reason for the strict door control in Tbilisi. If you let the wrong person into a club in Berlin or New York, they might not understand the vibe or could become annoying. Still, if the wrong person enters a club in Tbilisi, someone could seriously get hurt. The clubs face constant pressure as drug laws in Georgia are some of the strictest in Europe, making the police ever-vigilant of users. Merely having drugs in your system can lead to a 10-year prison sentence, something unthinkable in Western Europe. However, out of this refuge springs life, with dancers in Tbilisi moving as if there is no tomorrow, dancing like the world is ending and dancing as if their lives depend on it.

I tried again at Bassiani on Saturday, this time wearing my usual clothes and glasses, and was allowed in. It was a Horoom night, a smaller section of the club that hosts an LGBT party on Fridays. Bassiani is situated under a soccer stadium, and as you approach, you're faced with a colossal wall of concrete and several layers of security. Once inside, you're entirely cut off from any light, surrounded by one of the world's best sound systems. By 3 am, people begin to let loose. By 5 am, they become wild, feral, uncontrollable. I've never seen such dancing in my life, not in Berlin, New York, or London. People danced and moved with boundless energy. Tbilisi is a small city, so the rave scene is also small, making it feel like one big family dancing together. I stayed until the early hours, captivated by the music, and only left when I was on the verge of collapsing from exhaustion. I caught a Bolt, headed home with the sun out and birds chirping.

Later this week, I plan to venture into the mountains to explore rural Georgia, which is in stark contrast to Tbilisi. Part of me still can't believe I'm in this amazing, tragic, and beautiful place, while the rest of me is delighted that I am.

Speak soon,

James Kettle
